Implementation
This section details how each component of SonicAI was built, how they communicate with each other, and the specific technical decisions made during development. The implementation is organized into five major subsystems: the frontend interface, the backend API, the task orchestration layer, the AI generation pipeline, and the post-processing and storage system.

4.1 Frontend Implementation
The frontend is built with React 19 + Vite + TypeScript, chosen for its fast hot-module-reload during development, strict type safety, and compatibility with the latest React concurrent features. The entire application is a single-page application (SPA) where routing, state, and data fetching are handled entirely on the client side.
State management is handled by Zustand, a lightweight alternative to Redux. Zustand manages three primary slices of application state: the generation queue (tracking which jobs are pending, processing, or complete), the audio playback state (current track, position, volume), and the user session (JWT token, profile, authentication status). Zustand was preferred over React Context for its simplicity and performance on frequent state updates such as waveform position ticks.
Data fetching uses TanStack Query (React Query), which handles server-state synchronization, caching, and background refetching. All API calls to FastAPI — including submitting generation jobs, fetching the learning plan, retrieving user track history, and loading customization options — are managed through TanStack Query hooks, ensuring the UI stays consistent with server state without manual cache invalidation.
Audio visualization is powered by WaveSurfer.js, which renders an interactive FFT-based waveform for every generated audio track. The waveform component is mounted inside a React useEffect hook, with the WaveSurfer instance stored in a useRef to persist across renders. Users can click anywhere on the waveform to seek, and the playback position updates in real time through WaveSurfer's event API.
Real-time progress is delivered via a WebSocket connection established when a generation job is submitted. The socket listens for status events — queued, processing, inference, post_processing, and complete — and updates the Zustand generation queue accordingly, giving users a transparent view of every stage of their track's creation.

4.2 Backend Implementation
The backend is a FastAPI (Python 3.10+) application structured around a modular router pattern. Each functional area — authentication, generation jobs, user tracks, and educational content — has its own dedicated router file, keeping the codebase clean and maintainable.
Authentication is implemented with JWT (JSON Web Tokens) using the python-jose library, with OAuth 2.0 support for third-party login providers. Every protected API endpoint uses FastAPI's dependency injection system to verify the bearer token before executing the route handler. Token expiry, refresh logic, and revocation are all handled within the auth module.
Database access is managed via SQLAlchemy ORM with support for both PostgreSQL (production) and SQLite (development/testing). The schema includes tables for users, generation jobs, generated tracks, and user customization preferences. All database operations are performed asynchronously using SQLAlchemy's async session to avoid blocking the FastAPI event loop.
API routing follows RESTful conventions. The primary endpoints include POST /generate (submits a new music generation job), GET /jobs/{id} (polls job status), GET /tracks (retrieves user's track library), and GET /learning-plan/{genre} (fetches the AI-generated educational content for a given genre).

4.3 Task Orchestration — Celery + Redis
Music generation using deep learning models is computationally intensive and can take anywhere from 10 to 90 seconds depending on track length and hardware. Running this synchronously inside a FastAPI route would cause HTTP timeouts and block the server thread entirely. To solve this, SonicAI decouples generation from the API using Celery — a distributed task queue — brokered through Redis.
When a user submits a generation request, FastAPI creates a job record in PostgreSQL, enqueues the task to Redis, and immediately returns a job_id to the client. The Celery worker picks up the task from Redis and begins processing independently. Throughout inference, the worker pushes status updates back to the database (and through WebSocket to the frontend) so the user sees live progress without polling the API repeatedly. This architecture ensures the main FastAPI application remains fully responsive regardless of how many generation jobs are running concurrently.

4.4 Hybrid AI Generation Pipeline
SonicAI implements a dual-mode generation pipeline to ensure audio output is always available regardless of the server's hardware capabilities.
The diagram below shows how the pipeline branches based on hardware availability:
  ::view-transition-group(*),
  ::view-transition-old(*),
  ::view-transition-new(*) {
    animation-duration: 0.25s;
    animation-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.19, 1, 0.22, 1);
  }
VvisualizeVvisualize show_widgetPrimary mode — MusicGen inference: When a GPU is available, the Celery worker loads facebook/musicgen-small using a lazy-loading strategy, where the model weights are loaded into VRAM only when the first job arrives and kept resident for subsequent jobs to avoid repeated loading overhead. The enhanced text prompt is tokenized and passed to MusicGen's Transformer, which autoregressively predicts discrete audio tokens over Meta's EnCodec codec at 32kHz. These tokens are decoded by EnCodec back into a raw PCM waveform and saved as a .wav file.
Fallback mode — DSP synthesis engine: For environments without GPU access (such as CPU-only cloud instances or development machines), SonicAI's custom DSP engine produces layered multi-oscillator audio using additive and subtractive synthesis. Genre-specific presets define oscillator combinations — for example, a Lo-Fi preset combines a detuned Sine bass with a low-pass filtered Saw lead, while a Cinematic preset layers sustained Sine pads with bowed-string-approximating waveforms. While not AI-generated, this fallback produces structured, genre-appropriate audio that ensures the platform always delivers output.
Optional vocal synthesis — Bark: When the user requests vocals, the Bark model processes the provided lyrics through a three-stage Transformer pipeline: semantic token prediction, coarse acoustic token generation, and fine acoustic token refinement via EnCodec. The resulting vocal audio is passed to the mixing pipeline where it is time-aligned and overlaid onto the MusicGen or DSP backing track.

4.5 Post-Processing and Storage
All generated audio — regardless of which engine produced it — passes through a shared post-processing pipeline built with pydub and scipy. This pipeline applies three operations in sequence: peak normalization (scaling the waveform to a consistent loudness ceiling), vocal mixing (blending Bark vocals with the instrumental track at a balanced ratio), and master saturation (applying gentle harmonic distortion to add warmth and perceived loudness). The final output is saved as a normalized .wav file to the server's audio_files/ directory.
Metadata about each generated track — including the original prompt, customization parameters, genre, file path, creation timestamp, and owning user — is written to PostgreSQL via SQLAlchemy. This allows users to revisit their full track history through the frontend library view, replay waveforms, and download any previously generated file at any time.
The entire system is containerized using Docker and docker-compose, with separate service containers for FastAPI, Celery worker, Redis, and PostgreSQL. This isolation ensures clean dependency management, reproducible deployments, and straightforward horizontal scaling of Celery workers when generation demand increases.