5.1 System Overview
SonicAI follows a decoupled microservice architecture that separates user-facing services from resource-intensive AI inference. The system is designed around three core principles: teaching before generating, asynchronous processing for performance, and modular component design for scalability. The platform orchestrates multiple AI models, a task queue, and a responsive frontend into a unified educational music experience.

5.2 System Architecture Diagram
The diagram below illustrates how each component communicates across the full stack:
  ::view-transition-group(*),
  ::view-transition-old(*),
  ::view-transition-new(*) {
    animation-duration: 0.25s;
    animation-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.19, 1, 0.22, 1);
  }
VvisualizeVvisualize show_widget
5.3 User Workflow — Plan → Learn → Customize → Generate
SonicAI's core innovation lies in its teaching-first workflow. Unlike conventional tools that map input directly to output, SonicAI inserts an educational layer between the user's prompt and the final audio. The flowchart below illustrates this step-by-step process:
  ::view-transition-group(*),
  ::view-transition-old(*),
  ::view-transition-new(*) {
    animation-duration: 0.25s;
    animation-timing-function: cubic-bezier(0.19, 1, 0.22, 1);
  }
VvisualizeVvisualize show_widget
5.4 Module Descriptions
Module 1 — Prompt Enhancement Engine
Raw user prompts are pre-processed and enriched with technical descriptors such as "high fidelity", "studio quality", and genre-specific tags before being passed to the model. This improves the semantic precision of MusicGen's token prediction, resulting in more coherent and professional-sounding outputs.
Module 2 — AI Learning Plan Generator
Upon receiving an enhanced prompt, SonicAI's AI engine constructs a structured, personalized learning plan covering the theory behind the requested genre — including characteristic chords, scale types, rhythmic patterns, note ranges, instrumentation, and sound design principles. This is the core educational layer of the platform.
Module 3 — Interactive Customization Layer
Before generation begins, the user can actively modify each musical parameter surfaced in the learning plan — selecting specific chords, adjusting tempo, choosing instruments, and customizing sound texture. This transforms passive consumption into active creative participation.
Module 4 — Hybrid Generation Pipeline
SonicAI supports two generation modes. The primary mode uses facebook/musicgen-small via PyTorch with lazy VRAM loading for GPU environments. The fallback DSP synthesis engine uses additive and subtractive synthesis (Sine, Saw, Square oscillators) for environments without GPU access, ensuring platform-wide accessibility.
Module 5 — Vocal Synthesis (Optional)
When vocal overlay is requested, the Bark model tokenizes lyrics and predicts coarse-to-fine acoustic tokens through a three-stage Transformer pipeline, producing synthesized vocals that are merged with the MusicGen instrumental track.
Module 6 — Post-Processing Pipeline
All generated audio passes through a custom post-processing pipeline built with pydub and scipy, applying peak normalization, vocal mixing, and master saturation to ensure broadcast-quality output before delivery to the client.
Module 7 — Async Task Orchestration
Celery workers brokered through Redis handle all model inference tasks asynchronously, decoupling them from FastAPI's HTTP thread. Generation progress is streamed back to the frontend via WebSocket, keeping the user interface responsive and informative throughout the process.